Network packet documentation (#14613)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: doc/reference/networking/net_pkt.rst

UDP headers) will not be used for the payload.

On the receiving side, when the family and protocol are not known:

.. code-block:: c

    pkt = net_pkt_rx_alloc_with_buffer(iface, 800, AF_UNSPEC, 0, K_FOREVER);

will allocate 800 bytes and no extra header space.
But a:

.. code-block:: c

    pkt = net_pkt_rx_alloc_with_buffer(iface, 1600, AF_UNSPEC, 0, K_FOREVER);

will allocate 1514 bytes, the MTU + Ethernet header space.

One can increase the amount of buffer space allocated by calling
:c:func:`net_pkt_alloc_buffer`, as it will take into account the
existing buffer. It will also account for the header space if
net_pkt's family is a valid one, as well as the proto parameter. In
that case, the newly allocated buffer space will be appended to the
existing one, and not inserted in the front. Note however such a use
case is rather limited.  Usually, one should know from the start how
much size should be requested.

Deallocation
============

Each net_pkt is reference counted. At allocation, the reference is set
to 1.  The reference count can be incremented with
:c:func:`net_pkt_ref()` or decremented with
:c:func:`net_pkt_unref()`. When the count drops to zero the buffer is

> also un-referenced and net_pkt is automatically placed back int to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
also un-referenced and net_pkt is automatically placed back into the
```

and overwrite.  This might sound a bit unusual, but is in fact simple
and provides flexibility.

In write mode, whatever is written in the buffer affects the length of
actual data present in the buffer. Buffer length should not be
confused with the buffer size which is a limit any mode cannot pass.
In overwrite mode then, whatever is written must happen on valid data,
and will not affect the buffer length. By default, a newly allocated
net_pkt is on write mode, and its cursor points to the beginning of
its buffer.

Let's see now, step by step, the functions and how they behave
depending on the mode.

When freshly allocated with a buffer of 500 bytes, a net_pkt has 0
length, which means no valid data is in its buffer. One could verify
this by:

.. code-block:: c

    len = net_pkt_get_len(pkt);

Now, let's write 8 bytes:

.. code-block:: c

    net_pkt_write(pkt, data, 8);

The buffer length is now 8 bytes.
There are various helpers to write a byte, or big endian u16_t, u32_t.

.. code-block:: c

    net_pkt_write_u8(pkt, &foo);
    net_pkt_write_be16(pkt, &ba);
    net_pkt_write_be32(pkt, &bar);

Logically, net_pkt's length is now 15. But if we try to read at this

> point, it will fail becaus there is nothing to read at the cursor

Reviewer 2: s/becaus/because/

where we are at in the net_pkt. It is possible, while in write mode,
to read what has been already written by resetting the cursor of the
net_pkt. For instance:

.. code-block:: c

    net_pkt_cursor_init(pkt);
    net_pkt_read(pkt, data, 15);

> This will have reset the cursor of the pkt to the beginning of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will reset the cursor of the pkt to the beginning of
```

> the buffer and then let to read the actual 15 bytes present. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the buffer and then let you read the actual 15 bytes present. The
```

.. code-block:: c

    net_pkt_cursor_init(pkt);
    net_pkt_skip(pkt, net_pkt_ip_header_len(pkt));

Data access
===========

Though the API shown previously is rather simple, it involves always
copying things to and from the net_pkt buffer. In many occasions, it
is more relevant to access the information stored in the buffer
contiguously, especially with network packets which embed headers.

These headers are, most of the time, a known fixed set of bytes. It is
then more natural to have a structure representing a certain type of
header.  In addition to this, if it is known the header size appears
in a contiguous area of the buffer, it will be way more efficient to
cast the actual position in the buffer to the type of header. Either
for reading or writing the fields of such header, accessing it
directly will save memory.

Net pkt comes with a dedicated API for this, built on top of the
previously described API. It is able to handle both contiguous and
non-contiguous access transparently.

There are two macros used to define a data access descriptor:
:c:macro:`NET_PKT_DATA_ACCESS_DEFINE` when it is not possible to
tell if the data will be in a contiguous area, and

> :c:macro:`NET_PKT_DATA_ACCESS_CONTIGUOUS_DEFINE()` when

Reviewer 2: this macro has () but the one above does not, just wondering if we should remove the () here

    ipv4_hdr = (struct net_ipv4_hdr *)net_pkt_get_data(pkt, &ipv4_acess);

It would be the same for struct net_ipv4_hdr. For a UDP header it
is likely not to be in a contiguous area in IPv6
for instance so:

.. code-block:: c

    NET_PKT_DATA_ACCESS_DEFINE(udp_access, struct net_udp_hdr);
    struct net_udp_hdr *udp_hdr;

    udp_hdr = (struct net_udp_hdr *)net_pkt_get_data(pkt, &udp_access);

At this point, the cursor of the net_pkt points at the beginning of
the requested data. On the RX path, these headers will be read but not
modified so to proceed further the cursor needs to advance past the
data. There is a function dedicated for this:

.. code-block:: c

    net_pkt_acknowledge_data(pkt, &ipv4_access);

On the TX path, however, the header fields have been modified. In such
a case:

.. code-block:: c

    net_pkt_set_data(pkt, &ipv4_access);

If the data are in a contiguous area, it will advance the cursor
relevantly. If not, it will write the data and the cursor will be
updated. Note that :c:func:`net_pkt_set_data` could be used in the RX
path as well, but it is slightly faster to use
:c:func:`net_pkt_acknowledge_data` as this one does not care about

> contiguity at all, it just advance the cursor via

Reviewer: ```suggestion
contiguity at all, it just advances the cursor via
```

Overview
********

Network packets are the main data the networking stack manipulates.
Such data is represented through the net_pkt structure which provides

> a mean to hold the packet, write and read it, as well as necessary

Reviewer 2: >  It might be better to do your own editing based on these suggested edits and submit one amended commit rather than using the GitHub accept suggestion button.

BTW, at least I have never pressed the "Commit suggestion" button, instead I am always editing my local branch as in many times I need to reformat the lines (to make them shorter etc). And it also feels more kosher thing to do anyway :)

metadata for the core to hold important informations. Such object is
later named net_pkt in this document.

The data structure and the whole API around it are defined in
:zephyr_file:`include/net/net_pkt.h`.

Architectural notes
===================

There are two network packets flows within the stack, TX and RX. TX
for the transmission path and RX for the reception one. In both paths,
net_pkt are written and read from the beginning to the end, or more
specifically from the headers to the payload.

Memory management
*****************

Allocation
==========

All net_pkt objects come from a pre-defined pool of struct net_pkt.
Such pool is defined via

.. code-block:: c

    NET_PKT_SLAB_DEFINE(name, count)

Note, however, one will rarely have to use it, as the core provides

> already two pools, on for TX path and one for RX path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
two pools, one for the TX path and one for the RX path.
```

Allocating a bare metal net_pkt can be done through:

.. code-block:: c

    pkt = net_pkt_alloc(timeout);

However, by its nature, a bare metal net_pkt is useless without a
buffer and needs various metadata information to become relevant as
well.  It requires at least to get the network interface it is meant
to be sent through or through which it was received. As this is a very
common link, an helper exist:

.. code-block:: c

    pkt = net_pkt_alloc_on_iface(iface, timeout);

A more complete allocator exists, where both the net_pkt and its buffer
can be allocated at once:

.. code-block:: c

    pkt = net_pkt_alloc_with_buffer(iface, size, family, proto, timeout);

See below how the buffer is allocated.

Buffer allocation
=================

The net_pkt object does not define its own buffer, but instead uses an
existing object for this: struct net_buf. (See

> :ref:`_net_buf_interface` for more information). However, it mostly

Reviewer: Yep, delete the leading underscore to fix the doc build error.

> hides the usage of such buffer. Reason being that net_pkt brings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
hides the usage of such a buffer because net_pkt brings
```

network awareness to buffer allocation and, as we will see later,

> operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
its operation too.
```

To allocate a buffer, a net_pkt needs to have at least its network
interface set. This works if the family of the packet is unknown at
the time of buffer allocation. Then one could do:

.. code-block:: c

    net_pkt_alloc_buffer(pkt, size, proto, timeout);

Where proto could be 0 if unknown (there is no IPPROTO_UNSPEC).

As seen previously, the net_pkt and its buffer can be allocated at
once via :c:func:`net_pkt_alloc_with_buffer`. It is actually the most
widely used allocator.

> The network interface, the family and the protocol of the packet are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The network interface, the family, and the protocol of the packet are
```

used by the buffer allocation to determine if the requested size can
be allocated.  Indeed, the allocator will use the network interface to
know the MTU and then the family and protocol for the headers space
(if only these 2 are specified).  If the whole fits within the MTU,

> the allocated space will be of the requested size plus eventally the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the allocated space will be of the requested size plus, eventually, the
```

> headers space. On the contrary, the requested size will be shrunk so

Reviewer: ```suggestion
headers space. If there's insufficient MTU space, the requested size will be shrunk so
```

the possible headers space and new size will fit within the MTU.

> For instance, on an Ethernet network interface, with an MTU of 1500:

Reviewer: 1500 what?
```suggestion
For instance, on an Ethernet network interface, with an MTU of 1500 bytes:
```

.. code-block:: c

    pkt = net_pkt_alloc_with_buffer(iface, 800, AF_INET4, IPPROTO_UDP, K_FOREVER);

> Will successfully allocate 800 + 20 + 8 bytes of buffer for the new

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will successfully allocate 800 + 20 + 8 bytes of buffer for the new
```

> net_pkt Where:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
net_pkt, where:
```

.. code-block:: c

    pkt = net_pkt_alloc_with_buffer(iface, 1600, AF_INET4, IPPROTO_UDP, K_FOREVER);

> Will successfully allocate 1500 bytes on which 20 + 8 bytes (IPv4 +

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will successfully allocate 1500 bytes, and where 20 + 8 bytes (IPv4 +
```

UDP headers) will not be used for the payload.

> On receiving side, when family and protocol are not know:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the receiving side, when the family and protocol are not known:
```

.. code-block:: c

    pkt = net_pkt_rx_alloc_with_buffer(iface, 800, AF_UNSPEC, 0, K_FOREVER);

> Will allocate 800 bytes and no extra header space.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will allocate 800 bytes and no extra header space.
```

But a:

.. code-block:: c

    pkt = net_pkt_rx_alloc_with_buffer(iface, 1600, AF_UNSPEC, 0, K_FOREVER);

> Will allocate 1514 bytes, the MTU + Ethernet header space.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will allocate 1514 bytes, the MTU + Ethernet header space.
```

> One can raise the amount of buffer allocated by calling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One can increase the amount of buffer space allocated by calling
```

:c:func:`net_pkt_alloc_buffer`, as it will take into account the

> existing buffer. Obviously, it will also account for the hearders

Reviewer: ```suggestion
existing buffer. It will also account for the header
```

> space if net_pkt's family is a valid one as well as proto

Reviewer: ```suggestion
space if net_pkt's family is a valid one, as well as the proto
```

parameter. In that case, the newly allocated buffer space will be
appended to the existing one, and not inserted in the front. Note

> however such use case is rather limited.  Usually, one should know

Reviewer: ```suggestion
however such a use case is rather limited.  Usually, one should know
```

from the start how much size should be requested.

Deallocation
============

Each net_pkt is reference counted. At allocation, the reference is set
to 1.  The reference count can be incremented with
:c:func:`net_pkt_ref()` or decremented with
:c:func:`net_pkt_unref()`. When the count drops to zero the buffer is

> also un-referenced and net_pkt is automatically placed back to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
also un-referenced and net_pkt is automatically placed back into the
```

free net_pkt_slabs

If net_pkt's buffer is needed even after net_pkt deallocation, one
will need to reference once more all the chain of net_buf before

> calling last net_pkt_unref. See :ref:`_net_buf_interface` for more

Reviewer 2: Remote the _ from the ref

Reviewer: (Remove)

information.

Operations
**********

> There are two ways to access the net_pkt buffer. One being the basic

Reviewer: Let's simplify this to:
```
There are two ways to access the net_pkt buffer, explained in the
following sections: basic read/write access and data access, the latter
being the preferred way. 
```

read/write access. The second one, built on top of the first, being
specially made for data access which is the prefered way when creating
or reading headers for instance.

Read and Write access
=====================

As said earlier, though net_pkt uses net_buf for its buffer, it

> provides its own API to access it. Indeed, a network packet migh be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
provides its own API to access it. Indeed, a network packet might be
```

> scattered over a chain of net_buf, the functions provided by net_buf

Reviewer: ```suggestion
scattered over a chain of net_buf objects, the functions provided by net_buf
```

> are then limited for such case.  Instead, net_pkt provides a small

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are then limited for such case.  Instead, net_pkt provides
```

> bunch of functions which hides all the complexity of contiguous,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
functions which hide all the complexity of potential
```

non-contiguous access.

> Moving into the buffer is made through a cursor. Each net_pkt owns

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data movement into the buffer is made through a cursor maintained within each net_pkt.
```

> such cursor.  All r/w operations affect this cursor. Note as well that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All read/write operations affect this cursor. Note as well that
```

read or write functions are strict on their length parameters: if it
cannot r/w the given length it will fail. Length is not interpreted as
an upper limit, it is instead the exact amount of data that must be
read or written.

> As the two paths, TX and RX, there are two access modes: write and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As there are two paths, TX and RX, there are two access modes: write and
```

overwrite.  This might sound a bit unusual, but is in fact simple and

> provides a high flexibility.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
provides flexibility.
```

> In write mode, whatever is written in the buffer affects the length of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In write mode, whatever is written in the buffer affects the length
```

> the buffer. Length being here the length of actual data present in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of actual data present in the
```

> buffer.  Not to confuse with the buffer size which is a limit any mode

Reviewer: ```suggestion
buffer.  Buffer length should not be confused with the buffer size, which is a limit any mode
```

cannot pass.  In overwrite mode then, whatever is written must happen
on valid data, and will not affect the buffer length. By default, a

> newly allocated net_pkt is on write mode, and its inner cursor points

Reviewer: ```suggestion
newly allocated net_pkt is in write mode, and its cursor points
```

to the beginning of its buffer.

> Let's see now, step by step the functions and how they behave

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's see now, step by step, the functions and how they behave
```

depending on the mode.

When freshly allocated with a buffer of 500 bytes, a net_pkt has 0

> length, which means no valid data in its buffer. One could verify this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
length, which means no valid data is in its buffer. One could verify this
```

by:

.. code-block:: c

    len = net_pkt_get_len(pkt);

> Now 8 bytes will be written:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, let's write 8 bytes:
```

.. code-block:: c

    net_pkt_write(pkt, data, 8);

> It's length is now 8 bytes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The buffer length is now 8 bytes.
```

> There exist various helpers to write a byte, or big endian u16_t, u32_t.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are various helpers to write a byte, or big endian u16_t, u32_t.
```

.. code-block:: c

    net_pkt_write_u8(pkt, &foo);
    net_pkt_write_be16(pkt, &ba);
    net_pkt_write_be32(pkt, &bar);

> Logically, net_pkt's length is now 15.  If we try to read at this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Logically, net_pkt's length is now 15.  But if we try to read at this
```

> point, it will fail. Obviously there is nothing to read where we are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
point, it will fail because there is nothing to read at the cursor where we are
```

> at in the net_pkt. It is however, still in write mode, possible to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
at in the net_pkt. It is possible, while in write mode, to
```

> read what has been already written. It only requires to reset the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
read what has been already written by resetting the
```

cursor of the net_pkt. For instance:

.. code-block:: c

    net_pkt_cursor_init(pkt);
    net_pkt_read(pkt, data, 15);

This will have reset the inner cursor of the pkt to the beginning of
the buffer and then let to read the actual 15 bytes present. The
cursor is then again pointing at the end of the buffer.

To set a large area with the same byte, a memset function is provided:

.. code-block:: c

    net_pkt_memset(pkt, 0, 5);

Our net_pkt has now a length of 20 bytes.

Switching between modes can be achieved via
:c:func:`net_pkt_set_overwrite` function. It is possible to switch
mode back and forth at any time.  The net_pkt will be set to overwrite
and its cursor reset:

.. code-block:: c

    net_pkt_set_overwrite(pkt, true);
    net_pkt_cursor_init(pkt);

Now the same operators can be used, but it will be limited to the
existing data in the buffer, i.e. 20 bytes.

If it is necessary to know how much space is available in the net_pkt,

> it will be possible, indepentantly to overwrite, to call:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
call:
```

.. code-block:: c

    net_pkt_available_buffer(pkt);

> Or, if headers space needs to be accounted:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Or, if headers space needs to be accounted for, call:
```

.. code-block:: c

    net_pkt_available_payload_buffer(pkt, proto);

> Sometime, it might be necessary to place the cursor at a known position directly

Reviewer: Let's simplify this with:
```
If you want to place the cursor at a known position use the function
:c:func:`net_pkt_skip`.  For example, to go after the IP header, use:
```

and thus, instead of reading from or writing to the net_pkt, to just go the
relevant position. :c:func:`net_pkt_skip` is meant for this. For instance if
one wants to go after the IP header:

.. code-block:: c

    net_pkt_cursor_init(pkt);
    net_pkt_skip(pkt, net_pkt_ip_header_len(pkt));

Data access
===========

> Though the api seen previously is rather simple, it means always

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Though the API shown previously is rather simple, it involves always
```

> copying things to/from the net_pkt buffer. In many occasions, it is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
copying things to and from the net_pkt buffer. In many occasions, it is
```

more relevant to access the information stored in the buffer

> contiguously. Especially with network packets which embed headers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
contiguously, especially with network packets which embed headers.
```

These headers are, most of the time, a known fixed set of bytes. It is
then more natural to have a structure representing a certain type of
header.  In addition to this, if it is known the header size appears
in a contiguous area of the buffer, it will be way more efficient to
cast the actual position in the buffer to the type of header. Either
for reading or writing the fields of such header, accessing it
directly will save memory.

Net pkt comes with a dedicated API for this, built on top of the
previously described API. It is able to handle both contiguous and
non-contiguous access transparently.

The API is made of two functions: :c:func:`net_pkt_get_data` and
:c:func:`net_pkt_set_data`. Such functions take a net_pkt and a data
access descriptor. The data access descriptor is a structure
describing the size of the data and, eventually, a pointer to a

> contiguous area of the same size. There are two macros used to define

Reviewer: Change the wording here to:
```
There are two macros used to define a data access descriptor:
:c:macro:`NET_PKT_DATA_ACCESS_DEFINE` when it is not possible to
tell if the data will be in a contiguous area, and 
:c:macro:`NET_PKT_DATA_ACCESS_CONTIGUOUS_DEFINE()` when
it is guaranteed the data is in a contiguous area.
```

a data access despritor. One if it is not possible to tell if the data

> will be in a contiguous area or not: NET_PKT_DATA_ACCESS_DEFINE().

Reviewer 2: I think you can do here
```
c:macro:`NET_PKT_DATA_ACCESS_DEFINE`
```

And one if it is guaranteed the data will always be in a contiguous

> area: NET_PKT_DATA_ACCESS_CONTIGUOUS_DEFINE().

Reviewer 2: ditto

> Let's take the example of IP and UDP. Bot IPv4 and IPv6 headers are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's take the example of IP and UDP. Both IPv4 and IPv6 headers are
```

always found at the beginning of the packet and are small enough to
fit in a net_buf of 128 bytes (for instance, though 64 bytes could be
chosen).

.. code-block:: c

    NET_PKT_DATA_ACCESS_CONTIGUOUS_DEFINE(ipv4_access, struct net_ipv4_hdr);
    struct net_ipv4_hdr *ipv4_hdr;

    ipv4_hdr = (struct net_ipv4_hdr *)net_pkt_get_data(pkt, &ipv4_acess);

> It would be the same for struct net_ipv4_hdr. About UDP header now, it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It would be the same for struct net_ipv4_hdr. For a UDP header it
```

> is likely to happen that it will not be in a contiguous area in IPv6

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is likely not to be in a contiguous area in IPv6
```

for instance so:

.. code-block:: c

    NET_PKT_DATA_ACCESS_DEFINE(udp_access, struct net_udp_hdr);
    struct net_udp_hdr *udp_hdr;

    udp_hdr = (struct net_udp_hdr *)net_pkt_get_data(pkt, &udp_access);

> At this point, the inner cursor of the net_pkt points at the beginning

Reviewer 2: The "inner cursor" term is quite vague, should we just say "cursor" here?

Reviewer: Agree. I think all references to "inner cursor" should just be "cursor" throughout this doc.

> of the requested data. On RX path, these headers will be read but not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the requested data. On the RX path, these headers will be read but not
```

> modified so to proceed further the cursor needs to advance pass the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
modified so to proceed further the cursor needs to advance past the
```

data. There is a function dedicated for this:

.. code-block:: c

    net_pkt_acknowledge_data(pkt, &ipv4_access);

> On TX path however, the header fields have been modified. In such case:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the TX path, however, the header fields have been modified. In such a case, use:
```

.. code-block:: c

    net_pkt_set_data(pkt, &ipv4_access);

> If the data are on a contiguous area, it will advance the cursor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the data are in a contiguous area, it will advance the cursor
```

relevantly. If not, it will write the data and the cursor will be

> updated. Note that :c:func:`net_pkt_set_data` could be used in RX path

Reviewer: ```suggestion
updated. Note that :c:func:`net_pkt_set_data` could be used in the RX path
```
